# MATH 200. Calculus with Analytic Geometry I

Instructor:  Cheri Doucette, doucettecc@vcu.edu 
Textbook- Calculus: Early Transcendentals 3rd Edition

Math 200 is the first course in a two-semester sequence covering the calculus of one-variable functions.  This course covers functions, limits, derivatives, applications of the derivative, and integration.  All of this involves Chapters 1 through 5 of the text. Functions, limits, continuity, derivatives, differentials, antiderivatives and definite integrals.

Chapter 1 Functions: 1.1 Review of Functions, 1.2 Representing Functions, 1.3 Inverse, Exponential, and Logarithmic Functions, 1.4 Trigonometric Functions and Their Inverses. Elements of calculus: Algebra skills; the notion and terminology for various sets of real numbers; and the description of lines, circles and other basic sets in the coordinate plane. A review of this material is found in Appendix B, online at bit.ly/2y3Nck3. This chapter begins with the fundamental concept of a function and then presents the entire cast of functions needed for calculus: polynomials, rational functions, algebraic functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, and the trigonometric functions, along with their inverses. 

Chapter 2 Limits: 2.1 The Idea of Limits, 2.2 Definitions of Limits, 2.3 Techniques for Computing Limits, 2.4 Infinite Limits, 2.5 Limits at Infinity, 2.6 Continuity. All of calculus if based on the idea of a limit. Not only are limits important in their own right but they also underlie the two fundamental operations of calculus: differentiation (calculating derivatives) and integration (evaluating integrals). Derivatives enable us to talk about the instantaneous rate of change of a function, which, in turn, leads to concepts such as velocity and acceleration, population growth rates, marginal cost, and flow rates. Integrals enable us to compute areas under curves, surface areas, and volumes. Because of the incredible reach of this single idea, it is essential to develop a solid understanding of limits. We first present limits intuitively by showing how they arise in computing instantaneous velocities and finding slopes of tangent lines. As the chapter progresses, we build more rigor into the definition of the limit and examine the different ways in which limits arise. The chapter concludes by introducing the important property of continuity and by giving the formal definition of a limit. 

Chapter 3 Derivatives: 3.1 Introducing the Derivative, 3.2 The Derivative as a Function, 3.3 Rules of Differentiation, 3.4 The Product and Quotient Rules, 3.5 Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions, 3.6 Derivatives as Rates of Change, 3.7 The Chain Rule, 3.8 Implicit Differentiation, 3.9 Derivatives of Logarithmic and Exponential Functions, 3.10 Derivatives of Inverse Trigonometric Functions, 3.11 Related Rates. The first task is to introduce the fundamental concept of the derivative. Suppose a function f represents the quantity of interest – for example, the variable cost of manufacturing and item, the population of a country, or the position of an orbiting satellite. The derivative of f is another function, denoted f’, that gives the slope of the curve y=f(x) as it changes with respect to x. Equivalently, the derivative of f gives the instantaneous rate of change of f with respect to the independent variable. We use limits not only to define the derivative but also to develop efficient rules for finding derivatives. The application of the derivative – which we introduce along the way – are endless because almost everything around us is in a state of change, and derivatives describe change. 

Chapter 4 Applications of the Derivative: 4.1 Maxima and Minima, 4.2 Mean Value Theorem, 4.3 What Derivatives Tell Us, 4.4 Graphing Functions, 4.5 Optimization Problems, 4.6 Linear Approximation and Differentials, 4.7 L’Hôpital’s Rule, 4.9 Antiderivatives. Much of the previous chapter was devoted to the basic mechanics of derivatives: evaluating them and interpreting them as rates of change. We now apply derivatives to a variety of mathematical questions, many of which concern properties of functions and their graphs. One outcome of this work is a set of analytical curve-sketching methods that produce accurate graphs of functions. Equally important, derivatives allow us to formulate and solve a wealth of practical problems. For example, an asteroid passes perilously close to Earth: At what point along their trajectories is the distance separating them smallest, and what is the minimum distance? An economist has a mathematical model that relates to the demand for a product to its price: What price maximizes the revenue? In this chapter, we develop the tools needed to answer such questions. In addition, we begin an ongoing discussion about approximating functions, we present an important result called the Mean Value Theorem, and we work with a powerful method that enables us to evaluate a new kind of limit. The chapter concludes with two important topics: a numerical approach to approximating roots of functions, called Newton’s method, and preview of integral calculus, which is the subject of Chapter 5. 

Chapter 5 Integration: 5.1 Approximating Areas under Curves, 5.2 Definite Integrals, 5.3 Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, 5.4 Working with Integrals, 5.5 Substitution Rule. Cornerstone of calculus because it explains the relationship between the two processes of calculus: differentiation and integration. We begin by explaining why finding the area of regions bounded by the graphs of functions is such an important problem in calculus. Then you will see how antiderivatives lead to definite integrals, which are used to solve the area problem. You will also see the remarkable connection between derivatives and integrals, which is expressed in the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Develop key properties of definite integrals, investigate a few of their many applications, and present the first of several powerful techniques for evaluating definite integrals. 

## Test Material: 
[Course Sample Work](https://github.com/bryce-bowles/MDA_Course-info/blob/ec13b4e1ca3232cb67a48c67ec0f18e20d3ee188/Calculus/Samplework.pdf)

